This is an interview with Dr. Burke Rambo by Scott
Hill on November the 25th of 1988 at his home
concerning the Vietnam War. In the interest of
accumulating knowledge about the war, I'm going
to donate this tape to the Texas A&M oral history
collection in the university archives. Is this
all right with you? Yes. OK. First thing I want to
start with is just general information of your
date of birth, place of birth, And your education?
Date of birth, 30 April 1943, San Francisco.
Education, doctorate. In what area did you? It's
in social studies. OK. And you're currently
employed at Blinn? Currently employed at Blinn as
an adjunct instructor.
Your current military status? Commissioned
officer, not active.
What, uh, why did you join the military services
and when? Could you give us a little background
about that? First time I went in the military was
1963. It was a reserve program. From there back to
college in ROTC. Followed commission in May 66.
Later to Vietnam. Okay. I was commissioned in May
of 66. You went in the ROTC program at what
university? ROTC unit, Sam Houston State
Teachers College. Was it called Teachers
College? I went there for a year. Commonly called
Bearcat High.
What was your specialty or your job description
in the military? First job description would be
9,300, which was the old designation, the combat
intel, commissioned military intelligence.
Before MI was a branch, it was the army security and
army intelligence. It was AS and AI. And I worked in
the intelligence side.
At what point in your career did you receive orders
to go to Vietnam? Received orders to go to Vietnam
upon completion of infantry, or school after
infantry basic. What year was that? In 67. In 67 and
arrived in Vietnam June 67. Did you request to be
that assignment? We had a choice, a partial choice
between Vietnam and Korea. And if you were going to
do anything, you went to Vietnam. Why did you? Why
did you need to go to Vietnam if you were going to do
anything? What do you mean? I think if you have a war
going, declare it undeclared. And you want you
want a commission, you want to serve. I think you
should go. It's not a matter of saying I had to go or I
was told to go.
I think it's the difference between waiting
around for the draft notice and then running down
and enlisting five minutes ahead of the postman.
For an officer, if there's a war, then, you know,
the experiences where you stay in is going to be
what you use later anyway. At that time, did you
have designs on being a career military?
Considered it, and it'd be very...
It was one of the options, enjoy teaching or
instruction type. However, I won't say I didn't
enjoy what I did.
You get a lot smarter after you're in a while. Did
that
aspirations of possibly being career military
influence your decision on career or Vietnam? I
think the biggest thing on that area would be the
Uncle in World War II, he'd been an infantry
officer and well-decorated. Attitude was, if
you're not infantry, you're nothing. It's like
being the quarterback of the football team. It's
the desire of nearly everybody that plays
football would like to be, gosh, I want to be the
quarterback. Well, be the infantry lieutenant.
The guy that runs the battlefield.
And you arrived in... June 67. Arrived, I think, 8
June 67. Where were you stationed? Went from,
entered in Saigon, entered through Benoit,
Tonsenute Air Base, went north to what was called
Task Force Oregon. And at the time, it was a
classified project. They wouldn't tell you
anything in country before you left, except to say
it was upcountry, meaning north. Oh, I see. So
did they prepare you in any way for the Vietnam
cultural experience? Or did you just shift over
there, kind of cold turkey, knowing what to
expect? I won't say cold turkey, but I'm not sure
anybody ever knows what to expect. And you can see
all the news tape you want. It's like viewing the
news tape of a garbage dump. Until you go to the
dump, you don't want to get the smell of the tape.
You know, the analogy today would be you can watch
all the war shows you want, but the sensory part
that's missing is your nose. You know, you can sit
in the theater and see the big screen and, you know,
kick it, but you don't have the smell. When they
burn the barrel, you see a burning barrel, unless
you've put your nose over a burning barrel
downwind from one, you say, goodness. You then
know what the smell is. No, I don't think the army
and not to default to anything there. They had a job
getting people there. The, uh, the ability, I
guess, to adopt what we probably gambled, you
could take an American, he can do anything. I think
we may have overstated it, but, uh, as far as the
normal procedures to see what went on there before
you got there. There wasn't a big push on it. It was
just get in there, you know, you're there, go. What
were your first impressions when you first got
there? Smell. The door of the plane opens, you know
you're not at home.
The heat felt no different than Texas in
summertime.
We describe the sound as far as language or
anything goes. Hitting your ears immediately
would be a sing-song, musical sounds, a different
set of background noises. Even with city traffic,
there's still this, there's a strain, and of
course your nose picks up the smell immediately.
Normally here, we don't ride locked inside of
buses with cyclone fence over the windows, with
armed guards front and rear. You
know, it was kind of like walk down, go buy a
customs. Customs check was a joke. If you wanted to
take anything with you, you know, take it. If you
didn't, don't. And kind of walked by and said, you
got anything to declare? And that was kind of the
end. It's sort of like crossing the border of
Mexico today, unless the dogs. You mean you had a
customs check upon arrival? Upon arrival, we went
through Vietnamese. Technically, we were
guests. We went through Vietnamese customs,
which meant you walked down the ramp of the plane,
walked by a customs officer who may have asked one
or two people a dumb question, and the other 165 of
you shuffled by. In real life, no check.
What were they expecting you to say? I'm not sure
what they expected, what they were looking for and
didn't get an answer. If you had one, you didn't
tell them. They were looking for anybody carrying
private weapons. In other words, non-standard
issue stuff, and they kind of asked the question
over and over, does anybody, and of course
whoever, if anybody had one, they said no. So it was
saying, you know, just keep walking. Unload the
plane, get the plane empty. The plane leaves, you
file out, get on the buses. We'll haul you from
point A to point B, start processing.
So was it a very big culture shock for you? Culture
shock question, no. I think being raised in rural
areas, seeing rural poverty, and seeing places in
Mississippi in the 60s, in the early 60s, late 50s,
that aspect's not a culture shock.
Probably said by a lot of people there that we met,
that if the Vietnamese would talk to you, they
weren't the best citizens in their community, the
polite ones. The good ones seemed to put the
parasol between you and them and kept walking. But
as far as a terrible cultural shock, no. You just
saw poverty on a magnified level. See kids playing
in garbage. see people picking through it, but a
great shot to know.
Where were you assigned? I went to Task Force
Oregon, which is at Chu Lai I-Corps, about 55 miles
south of Da Nang.
OK. On the East Coast? Yeah, it was on the ocean, on
the ocean side. Batangan Peninsula, which is
south of there.
When you got there, can you describe what you went
through, how you were processed? Overnight plane
ride, plenty of bull and chatter on a noisy C-130,
which are uninsulated. Arriving at a replacement
point in the night, told, make yourself
comfortable. The roads are closed. We'll be down
to get, you know, they come down in the morning to
pick you up. First light, you see the mine sweeping
team coming down the road, walking ahead of the
trucks to pick you up. And basically, it looks like
any processing done in any military anywhere in
the world, after they get you in, get the orders
out, it was officers one way and enlisted the other
way. Hurry up and wait. Stand in line. We'll hurry
you over there on a jet, fly you up country on a
propeller plane, and stand you in a tin building
and let you wait. What
I kind of wanted to get was just a brief idea of what
exactly you did, what was your function. I
processed in and was assigned to the Task Force
Oregon, which later became Americal Division, to
the Division Intelligence Unit. And one of the
first functions I would take would be to work in the
order of battle shop. This area coordinated,
collected agent reports, the paper trail
information on the other side, coordinated it
Issued new reports, summaries of the unit
strengths, the enemy side. Worked with our side,
the G3.
And trying to develop the intelligence we needed
for the commander to go out and shoot the bad guys
and do whatever he wanted to. Provide him a
service.
You read thousands of pages of reports. Sifted the
bull, which was most of it. I guess they saw a good
thing coming when they saw us. If you had some trash
to sell, don't steal. Sell it to the Americans as an
agent report. Tell them there's somebody in the
woods. They'll buy it. Somebody will buy it from
you. And basically, the job there was for quite a
while was building up this database. The Task
Force Oregon crew had been there about 90 days. The
Army had relieved the Marine Corps. And they were
still settling in a division. And it was process
your data. And some of it was electronic,
non-electronic, aerial surveillance, the
pictures, the agent reports, sightings from your
troops. And what you're amounted to was a big
sifter in a cookie factory. Can you make sense out
of all the stuff coming in? What do you do with it?
And that would be the normal That'd be the normal
day. You get up, you go to work, you shuffle
mountains of paper. You try to reduce it down to a
two-page, three-page, four-page report,
depending on what the bosses wanted.
And that would be the overriding day in, day out.
You also, if you could, got out. Can you find
anything to do outside base camp wire? And...
Probably one thing to be said when you go to town
outside any of the gates in Vietnam, after a while,
all the towns look alike.
Street full of beggar kids wearing shirts three
times their size. Actually, the shirt may be the
only clothing they had on. It may not be. Usually
short pants. Always wanting to wash your Jeep for
money, guard your Jeep for money, clean your
rifle. A lot of the children could take your rifle
apart faster than the average American soldier.
They could clean them, put them back together, and
hand them back to you. I think the, this part of
seeing this many orphans, uh, war created, uh,
other problems. I think that was where a lot of
people weren't even looking at your own ghettos.
Your ghettos were, were good.
The, uh, Life in the camp was, you stayed behind the
wire. We had Vietnamese that worked on the
compound. The area I worked in was a restricted
area. We kept everybody out. You processed your
paper. You would see the commanding general. We
had a crew, and I worked with him, posting his maps
at night. Learned a lot of strange things in the
Army. When the general comes in, you leave his
office, except we made a trade. We didn't. They had
to be posted. They wore a game. They pulled the
stickers off the maps. What you really did in the
order of battle area is you sorted out the
multitude of units that you were facing and tried
to find where were they hiding, where are their
headquarters, what are their intentions from
captured documents. The IPW prisoner of war
compound provided you the reports. The national
police provided them. Other agencies, what we had
to do was kind of coordinate the flow. That was the
actual two's job. Our boss was to supply the
commander with the needed data. Then he broke the
job down, and you got whatever task came up inside
of this. You may do a project. You may end up writing
a book. In other words, 30, 40, 50 days on a project.
I may want a two-page paper. It's 10 o'clock now. I
want it at 1 o'clock. Go look in your file, what have
you got? Your best guess if you got nothing. And you
do this kind of shuffling. Were you involved in
gathering intelligence? I worked some in
collection, mostly that later, but some in Chulai
going out and running low-level agent nets,
talking to people, picking up data, mainly going
downtown, collecting information. working
somebody else's net they set up. You simply went
in, if you want to look at it, picked up the paper and
came back to town.
Most of it was kind of the security side in a way,
looking at it. We worried about how much could they
get from looking at what you were doing. And we
provided the other side, our soldiers did, a lot of
information that was useful. You could tell if a
big operation was coming because simply just go
down. Everybody asked for the laundry back a
couple days early. Or I won't see you on Thursday. I
won't be here on Thursday. You count the
helicopters. If a helicopter's going out, it's
hauling people. There's a limit. You just count
them and keep counting, and then you know how many
helicopters. You said you provided the other side
with information? Yeah, all your troops do. If you
go downtown to the village and you talk, They have
their agents in the town. We had our agents. Both
sides ran agent nets.
Both sides had tax collectors. The South
Vietnamese government would come in and collect
money. During the daytime, the communist
government would come in at night, or the shadow
government, whatever you want to call it, would
come in and tax the people. We'd come back the next
day, fine you with a tax receipt, and take the tax
receipt away from you. It was illegal. Now you're
out your services or you're out your rights, and we
took the receipt. So even if they win, they don't
pay you. You have no record. You know, drafting in
Vietnam was fascinating to watch. South
Vietnamese government surrounds a village, goes
in and picks out all the young military-age males
and loads them on the truck. That's how you visit
your local recruiter. He comes to your door.
That, uh... Mostly, at least during the initial
few months, it was working in the office,
shuffling papers, visiting outlying camps and
fire bases, finding out what they've got going on,
going on patrol, whatever the commander wanted,
whatever your boss wanted you to do or whatever you
could go do, that it was kind of up to you to get out
and hustle if you wanted to do something. And I
think part of it was wanting to get away from the
flagpole, get away from headquarters. I'm here,
send me to the woods. I'm here, let me go to the
woods. There was a joke used to tell in Vietnam, if
you messed up in the base camp, they sent you to the
woods. If you messed up in the woods, they sent you
to the base camp. And depending on where you were
standing and what you wanted to do, mess up. You get
a change of scenery. You foul up here, we ship you
out. You foul up out there, they ship you back. So
when you couldn't stand what you were doing, you
asked for a transfer. How did the military train
you for the function? Was it in the States? Yeah,
when I left Fort Benning, went to Fort Holabird in
Baltimore, Maryland, received the initial
intelligence training. And the Army cut short the
training program and had a levy need, which is a
requirement for 400 officers in Vietnam, 400
intelligence officers. So you go through the
school, a very quick one. You come out the other
side wearing the brass that says you are now an
intelligence lieutenant. Even if you can't spell
it, you are one. Steal the Marine line. And on to
Vietnam. give you 30 days leave, and send you over.
Did you feel like you were adequately prepared?
Oh, I don't think any lieutenant would ever have
all the training you want. I think you always want
more, but so what? You got about the same amount the
other guy got. The infantry officer going to
Vietnam is from ROTC. Got nine weeks at Fort
Benning. I did the nine weeks at Benning, then went
on to Fort Hollabird, did their training cycle,
and shipped to Vietnam. So you were in training
longer than the infantry lieutenant who got
there. In other words, we had people who left nine
weeks after arriving in mid-January straight to
Vietnam. We went to another school, and we caught
up with them in June. They're already there.
They've been there a couple of months. What
happened to you guys? We went to intelligence
school.
They had a requirement at that era that all
intelligence officers had to be trained in one of
the combat arms, infantry, artillery, or armor.
And due to my uncle's persuasiveness, I chose
infantry.
That
may not be all it was put up to be,
You know, it's like wanting a quarterback in the
Super Bowl. Every kid did to play football.
So you were there right before Ted, around Ted. Did
you notice an increase in information or
intelligence? Did you have any inkling through
the intelligence that you gathered that
something like that was about to happen? We had
reports. But the problem with reports is you
always have reports one side saying it's going to
happen. Pick a date, any date you want in Vietnam,
and you could have an attack on it. And you had a
report that said it's going to happen. It's how
true is the source. There were clues. And we had
captured, which we learned later, prior to Tet,
the Tet documents for I-Corps. United States
Marine Patrol went out, picked him up, came back,
and did not process their documents.
That always looking back, it's easy to pick out,
yeah, here's the report. I absolutely knew this
guy was right. Looking at it at the moment, you
always expect You can be shelled anytime, whether
it's going to be well-organized, high level, and
happen like it turned out to be is another guess.
Probably the answer is, in the place I worked,
sure, there was a guess that everybody wanted to
bet on one side, put your money on, Ted's going to be
exciting. The optimist said, quit worrying. The
pessimist won the argument in this case. But we
didn't have... Copies, and by the way, their
copies that they wrote never did exactly name your
place. They always used code names for their
targets. So even if you had one, you knew it was
going to happen sometime because they wrote these
orders.
It's how you interpret it. Looking backwards,
yeah, we saw a lot of things. We didn't read the
signals. Did you find that a lot of the
intelligence that you gathered and passed on was
not active on? Oh. First off, you get it that you
pass it and the boss does what he wants with it. You
may never know first if it's acted on or not. You
hand your report out, they send it down to the
field, somebody in the field does something, you
don't know if they moved on that report, another
report, a guy steps in a hole and breaks his leg and
finds a tunnel. It's how do you find it. Most
intelligence reports if you want to consider them
one sheet of paper, are never acted on. In other
words, you may spend six months piecing together a
picture that's fuzzy, then go sell the commander,
let's act on it. And you go out there and then
nothing happens. And you know what the commander
says after that? Don't bother me. What are you guys
doing back here? You know, what's going on behind
the building with the shut doors and the shame
drawn? Not work, I know. We went out and looked and
didn't find anything. And you may have 8, 10, 12, 20
dry runs for every time you hit something. The
problem was that if the troops in the field, and by
the way, the troops in the field at least
traditionally and a good bit of experience in
Vietnam suggest, see things, they had to be taught
to turn it in.
Teaching troops to turn it in is never simple.
Teaching a guy not to take the enemy soldier's
wallet is never simple. Not only when he gets the
wallet with the money in it or the picture in it and
says, I got one off a dead guy, he also destroyed any
intelligence information if he keeps the paper.
Throws the papers away, we can never find which
body they came from. You know, we created
problems. But you always hoped your intelligence
is better. You'd love to fall into the road map, get
the whole plan of the entire war laid out for you and
have the document. Normally what you get... It's
like looking through a telescope without having a
map. You've got hundreds of pictures of whatever
you're looking at. What is it? And to make fun of
intelligence might be to talk about from the old,
the six men of Endistan. They were all blind. They
went out to see what an elephant looked like. One
walks under it, there's nothing there. It's like
the air. One grabbed his tail. It's like a rope. One
grabbed his trunk. One grabbed his leg. describe
what you grabbed each one of them described an
elephant they were all right as far as it went and
that's the thing with intelligence it first has to
be timely it has to be accurate and if you're going
to make a living out of this and stay there you've
got to be believable to the boss and that's the hard
part what are you guys selling today we went you
know last month last year last time out we found
nothing now what makes this report better than the
other one And it's not like going out and selling
cars. In fact, a lot of times in Vietnam, we
couldn't tell them all we found. We could give you a
hint. Do this, do something. In fact, we had a
problem policy that changed before it was over was
we had several times we knew attacks would occur
and we didn't tell units. Why was that? The source
of the information was worth more than the unit.
What's the sense of having the information? If you
have a source and the other side figures out the
only source you have, it's a unique, critical
side. If they know where the leak is, they can plug
it any time they want. Instead of tipping it off for
five men, I want to save it for something
worthwhile because they'll know how we did it
eventually. You know, it's like playing poker.
You may throw in a few cards and fold. You may want to
play the whole hand. If you play the whole hand and
there was only one way they could have said this and
they discover they've got a security problem,
they'll fix it. So you better play it when it's
important. You just don't play it for them just to
do it. You
did that all the way till June of 68? I worked in the
order of battle six, seven months and crossed out
with the IPW, the interrogation section.
Eventually I ended up in the interrogation
section. doing interrogations and processing
captured documents, between doing whatever, the
patrolling, the women on long range,
the visitation to the SF camps, the out of compound
work. Went back in the compound division where I
either performed documents or interrogations.
So you went into the field? You went to the field,
but you didn't stay. Other words, I would be sent
out with a sergeant, with two sergeants, with
whatever the boss, however many interrogation
teams you need. Get a team out, you do your job,
you're assigned to some task force, you're
attached. As soon as the operation's over, you
come home, the unit goes back to their base camp.
Next time out, whoever's on rotation goes out, or
as required. Look, what exactly can you describe
exactly like a typical operation? Typical
operation probably would go out and join the
infantry. And if someone jokingly said about it,
walk through miles and miles and nowhere, fly you
out, dump you off, and walk. And most of the time,
you did not get prisoners.
If you got them, they were wounded. If they were
wounded, they were put on a helicopter and flown to
the rear if they were severely wounded. If you got
one in the field that wasn't wounded severely, you
had the problem of however you want to sort out, is
he lying and telling the truth? If I'm holding a gun
upside your head or whoever's holding it,
bringing you into me when they turn you over to me.
If I ask you a question, if you ask it the wrong way,
you're going to always answer the question,
trying to figure out what the guy wants to hear.
Unless you want to die right there. And then you go
out and you try to check the story the guy's giving
you, and there's nothing to it. So then you ship him
on back as a prisoner. Actually, what we had, what
we held them was the Vietnamese government ran the
only prison camps. We ran detention collection
points. We would hold them, process them, decide
were they innocent civilians. If so, turn them
loose. If not, then we forward them to the next
level, the Vietnamese government. which ran
their prisoner of war camps.
The field interrogations were usually at a low
level, no great sophistication. Where'd you come
from? Where you going? What's your unit doing? How
many of them? What are you doing out here? You know,
you get dumb answers, and this is where you may find
cultures different. It may pay you to sit and ask
them, how's your grandfather? Have you had a
letter from home lately? No. We approach it one
direction. The Vietnamese approach the
answering the questions the other way. And if you
had the time and wanted one of them to tell you what
he was doing, you gave him a notebook if he could
read and write. And you told him to write out
everything he'd ever done in the Army,
self-critique. And the little guy sits down and
starts writing and writes you mountains of it.
Describe all the stuff you've ever done since the
day you joined the Army. And he starts. Oh, you
won't. It's the last page. What was he doing? just
before the two of y'all's armies bumped into each
other. I don't want to know who his cook was, but I'm
saying we want to know what's he doing, but to get
him there, you may have to let him do all his talking
and go the other way. Because of the cultural
difference? Their way of doing business, the
communist system, that and culture. You tried to
take advantage of early on interrogations. You
tried to find out religions. whatever,
take advantage of it. Take advantage of the lack of
it. If what you had to do was find something that
made the other guy uncomfortable, can I get there?
Can I get him to talk? By the way, the ultimate loss
is if you beat him until he talks.
You go anywhere you want to with that report, but 9
out of 10, although the odds may be even higher, it
won't be true because I'm going to tell you
anything to get you to stop. So what you wanted was
you wanted him to quote unquote willingly tell
you. The only problem you had was, Lieutenant, we
want the report on our desk in an hour. So that gives
you 30 minutes to shake on him, 30 minutes to write
the report, and just hope he had something to say.
No, sir, he didn't know a thing. All he did was carry
rice. All he did was dig ditches for them. The
thousand and one things that both armies do, you
caught people from stupid to brilliant. And it's
sort of like saying, what do you expect the average
Vietnamese soldier who infiltrated from up
north, who had walked down south, it may have taken
him two months to get there, He's been there a
couple months, hiding in the woods, coming closer
and closer to your camp. Your unit goes out,
surprise him, and you catch him, and you ask him
where he is, and he has no idea because he can't read
a map.
He was just sent to do a job. And they can usually
name the officer above them, the unit they're in.
They have a lot of nicknames, code names for their
units. He had a thing called a letterbox number,
which would be like our zip code. So he could have a
letter written to him. But a lot of times they
didn't know a lot of things. But it's these small
pieces, five words here, ten words there, a
sentence or two here. Once in a while you hit, it's
like digging for diamonds. Once in a while you find
one, most of the time you're in the hog pen when
you're through digging. There's not a hit. So you
had, did you know any Vietnamese, or did you have a
South Vietnamese? We used interpreters to start
with. We found a lot of, some of the prisoners you
encountered spoke English, some spoke French.
Gradually you could learn, or you did learn to do it
orally as far as reading and writing. It took more
time. Worked on some, did not go to a school. It was
haphazard. You learned the military terminology
you needed, but you couldn't order dinner in a good
restaurant.
So,
typical field operation would just go up trying to
flush the quail. Yeah, you went on walks in the, and
made fun of it, walks in the woods, shake down rice
paddies. There's a report, which you may or may not
have furnished them, but there's something going
on in the area. The commander says, check it out.
You may send 150 guys. You may send 500. You may send
1,000, the battalion, depending on what's going
on. And usually, you tagged along with the lead
element of the company right behind it, or
whatever it was near the front. So if something
happened, they had one of you worthless intel
types up there. And I'm over and over, what do you
guys do? Well, we talk to prisoners, but you've got
to catch them first. You bring me one. You bring the
guy in, and no documents on him. His wallet's
missing. He swears it was stolen. No papers. You
simply hurt yourselves and what you had to do. A lot
of the time we spent nearly as much time in the field
educating the troops, trying to talk to them. But,
you know, if you think of the problem you're
facing, here it is, you and the other guy have just
shot each other, your friends have been shot, you
remind them of all the things that's happened in
the past, and now I want you to turn loose to this one
guy everybody's getting ready to beat up on and
give him to me. Are you kidding? We're not through.
It's like a football game. No, no, not until after
we pile on. If you kill him, you kill your friends.
It's the best way to describe it to anybody. Every
time you killed one without getting anything from
him, you just didn't bring him in. And by the way,
there's not a big neon sign on the battlefield that
says take prisoners. There's a requirement if you
do get them that you treat them right. However, the
difference between being a dead, attempted
surrender And a prisoner is, you run through a
hedgerow carrying a stick. It looks like a rifle.
We shoot and kill you. But once the fighting's
over, we've got you. We're not supposed to kill
you. It was convincing guys that their units had
been mauled on. Some of their buddies had been
killed, not cleanly either. Give me a prisoner.
You caught the guy. Here's the report you wrote in
the field, or you just brought him to me. You've
tagged him. Here's where we caught him. We caught
him with a rifle. What are you guys going to do?
We're going to talk to them. Talk. I want more than
talk. That's what we're trying to do, fellas, is
get some answers to where they are, what they're
doing, so we can get more of them. When you don't
bring them to us, we can't do anything. You're
along then as an observer. What you can see and make
your best guess, add up all the strange facts in the
field, you've got that. Other than that, you're
out. You're no better than the next guy.
We try to be more organized about it. That's what
the whole business of the branch was. Sometimes it
works, sometimes it doesn't. There were
commanders in Vietnam who didn't care about
intelligence. They didn't believe in it. First,
you got 99 bad reports. Can't you fools sort out
which one of these is true? Yes and no. We believe.
It's sort of like playing poker at the table, and
you ask me, what are the other five poker players
holding in their hand? If I've seen all the
discards, they were face up, they drew their card
face up, I have a clue on how they're betting if I'm a
good player. But if you played all seven cards
down, and you ask what are they holding, I can only
look at the three they've played, the four they've
played, the five, and make a guess. Other words,
what we tried to do was guess what their commander
was going to do. Do you think that the hostilities
that the soldiers felt towards these prisoners
was typical of Vietnam, or typical of any war, or
just unique of the Vietnam situation? Oh, I think
that any time any two armies are out there killing
each other, that You have a problem because the
first problem is you're supposed to hate the other
side's government, not the other side's soldier
necessarily. He's a professional, too. The
problem was keeping that attitude in mind doesn't
do a lot to motivate you to take the hill. It's like
the old first sergeant said, if you kill enough of
them, he'll come along and take the names. If he's
too busy, never mind, we'll just skip
name-taking. You know, we got a job. Well, it's how
you keep, and the strange thing is, it's how you
keep your emotions under control. You're doing a
job out there. The moment you forget what your job
is, and by the way, any lieutenant's job wasn't to
fire a weapon. The job's traffic cop. You direct
people. When you had to start shooting, you lost
control because you're now playing the part of a
rifleman, a private. Somebody's got to run the
unit or nobody, and it may be nobody sometimes. And
that's one of the problems we had. I think it takes a
few battles. It's just like playing football, but
where do you practice war scrimmages? We have
training exercises. These are supposed to
simulate war. Nothing, no training table can ever
simulate war because if you go to Benning or any of
the places and you make a mistake, the land grader
stops and says, Lieutenant, that's not the school
solution.
That's good as far as it goes. However, on the
battlefield, there's not going to be any land
grader or any referee or any zebra to replay the
hands you're dealt. It's when the two of you units
or armies bump into each other, both of you play
what you hold. The guy that plays it best wins.
There are stupid, dumb things the American army
walked into in Vietnam. There were stupid traps we
set up that any American would have seen it, but
they weren't Americans. They came walking down
the trail and walked right into your hands. You
think of this. You go out and dig foxholes and lay in
the woods and set an ambush. You stay quiet and let
the other unit walk up 20 yards from you, 25 yards,
and then holler surprise, whatever you want to
holler.
Battles do strange things to people. Some of them
don't fire their rifles. Probably in Vietnam, one
in five, one in six, and a lot of them didn't shoot.
The other problem is you get some guys you can't
stop. You put a leash on them, it's an Exxon Tiger in
your tank thing. Your job as a lieutenant is direct
traffic. If you're an infantry lieutenant, you
have four squad leaders and a platoon sergeant,
five people you're responsible for. Everybody's
responsible for four or five others. Everybody's
got to make sure the job's done. When you have
problems, it's when you go out there and nobody
does that job, the chain of command breaks down.
Then you get into the, we've got a problem, sir. And
what do we do about it? Well, that's when it
becomes... Gosh, I wasn't there either type
answer. Nobody was there. If it goes wrong, try to
find anyone who wants to stand up and say, yeah,
yeah, we did that. If it went right, everybody
wants to be dead center in the picture saying, see
what I did, Mom. Nobody would take
responsibility. Nobody wants to blame.
Everybody wants the credit. If it was a million
dollars, it would be giving away everybody's kin
to you. And if you owe a bill, try to catch one.
So I just think you're, how successful do you feel
like, or is there any measure of success for you?
Yeah, there's measures of success. I think if you
go out and you see that you've converted even a few
of these guys, the riflemen, to collect the data,
to leave the documents on the body until you can get
there. To show you the stuff, you know, we had
training programs. We'd go out and say, if you see
any of these things, the old Army show-and-tell
program, show them a picture of all this trash the
enemy has, all their stuff. If you see any of it,
don't touch it, don't move it, come get us. We've
got the people that need to look at it exactly as it
is. Don't tear it up. Don't bring it to us because
you've destroyed a lot of it. Yeah, there were
successes. There were also failures. It was just
like any program. It was always ongoing. The thing
I think that made Vietnam tough, every 12 months,
everybody in the unit left and went home. What we
had in Vietnam, probably the nice about it, was
21-year lesson plans, which always learned the
same thing no matter which year you learned them
in. And reading the files afterwards tended to
suggest that we always learned the same thing, how
to tie your shoes.
You didn't learn what you needed. You were always
learning basics, never mind getting on to the
advanced things. Oh, the chance they were new.
Some of them were old guys, some of them were new
guys, and there was no old guy, new guy loyalty. It
was your old friends, basically. And unit
cohesiveness, and I think the thing, looking
back, that the Army's even learned is you don't
send people as individual replacements to wars.
You send units. We've gone back to what the British
had, the old British Army Regiment. The American
Army's called it the cohort. We've gone back to
this group that's going to go to school together,
train together, fight together, and be replaced
together. It's not we're going to shuffle you out
on a pass Graduation came 365 days a year in
Vietnam. Your year's up, pack it.
And you went out one time with four people who'd
been there a year. You were the rookie. Next time
you went in the woods, you'd been there six months.
You had one old man with you and two rookies. The
last time you go out, you're the old man. They're
the rookies. There was never any of this. We worked
together, trained together,